ZEN CULTURE



Foreword


ANYONE WHO EXAMINES the Zen arts is immediately struck by how modern they
seem. Many of the most famous stone gardens are abstract expressionism
pure and simple, created out of found objects. The ceramics of the
sixteenth-century Zen artists could be interchanged with the rugged
pots of our own contemporary crafts movement and few people would
notice a difference. Ancient Zen calligraphies, bold and slashing,
suggest the monochromes of Franz Kline or Willem de Kooning, and if the
word "impressionistic" has any real meaning left, the spontaneous,
intuitive, impulsive Zen painters should have first claim to it. The
apparent nonsense and illogic of Zen parables established the
limitations of language long before the theater of the absurd decided
to ridicule our modern doublespeak; indeed, our new-found skepticism
about language as a medium for communication was a commonplace to
Japanese artists who created both a drama (the No) and a poetry (the
Haiku) that neatly circumvent reliance on mere words for expression--and
in two entirely different ways. Four-hundred-year-old Zen architecture
appears to be virtually a copy of contemporary design ideas: modular
sizing, exposed woods and materials, movable partitions,
multifunctional rooms, bare walls and uncluttered space, indirect
lighting effects, and a California marriage of house and garden. The
celebrated tea ceremony might be considered an early form of Japanese
group therapy, while Zen landscape gardens are nothing less than a
masterful deception masquerading as the "natural" look.

If all this were not coincidence enough, consider for a moment our
present-day artistic conventions and aesthetic ideals. Like much of
what we consider "modern," Zen arts tend to be as simple as possible,
with clean, even severe, lines. Decoration for its own sake is
virtually nonexistent; Zen artists had no more taste for the ornate
than we do today. The works of medieval Zen artists were rough and
asymmetrical, with a skillful exploitation of deliberate imperfections
and blemishes to make the viewer aware of both the materials used and
the process of creation. If it is true that classic art makes one aware
of the form and romantic art makes one aware of the artist, Zen art
makes one aware of the work of art itself.

We have absorbed into our Western culture almost unawares such Zen
cultural forms and aesthetic principles as Japanese ideas of
architecture, gardens, and flower arranging. Other forms, such as Haiku
poetry and Zen-style ceramics, we have borrowed in a more open-handed
way, freely acknowledging the source. Actually, none of the Zen arts is
really out of our reach, and a critical following has developed in the
West for almost all of them. The great Irish poet and dramatist William
Butler Yeats embraced the Zen-inspired No drama, although he probably
knew next to nothing about Zen. (For that matter, we should recall that
no English-language books were written on Zen until well into the
twentieth century.) It seems fair to say that the Zen arts have touched
us because they express some view of the world that we have, several
hundred years later, quite independently come to share.

Yet for all the seeming familiarity, there remains an alien quality. We
are not always aware of the really quite extraordinary mind
manipulation inherent in Zen art. Why, for instance, does a Japanese
garden often seem much larger than it really is? How does the Japanese-
style room alter human perception in such a way that people's
experience of each other is intensified? Why do Zen ceramics always
manage to make one take special notice of their surface? This subtle
manipulation of perception is all done by ingenious but carefully
hidden tricks. But since the Zen arts appear so modern, we are lulled
out of looking below the surface to find the fundamental differences.

Most important of all, it is easy to miss what is surely the most
significant quality of Zen arts--their ability to unlock our powers of
direct perception. Since Zen teaches that categories and systematic
analysis hinder real understanding of the outer

(or inner) world, many Zen arts are specifically designed to awaken our
latent ability to perceive directly. They appear innocent enough on the
surface, but they involve a subtle mind- massage not obvious to a
casual observer. It is this added dimension of Zen art that truly sets
it apart from anything we have produced in the twentieth century.

In these pages I will attempt to trace the history and characteristics
of both Zen and the Zen arts--to explain where they came from, why they
arose, what they were intended to do, and how they go about doing it. I
have also included some Western-style analysis of their very non-
Western qualities. The aesthetic ideas embedded in Zen culture and its
perception-inducing works of art are among the most stunning
achievements in world art history. Zen culture, concerned as it is with
the process of perception as much as with actual works of art, can open
our senses so that we experience anew the arts of both East and West,
ancient and modern.




Contents


PART I: The Beginnings: Prehistory to 1333

1.	Zen Culture and the Counter Mind
2.
3.	The Prelude to Zen Culture
4.
5.	The Rise of Japanese Buddhism
6.
7.	The Chronicles of Zen
8.
9.	Zen Archery and Swordsmanship
10.
PART II: The Age of High Culture: Ashikaga (1333-1573)

11.	The Great Age of Zen
12.
13.	Zen and the Landscape Garden
14.
       8.    The Stone Gardens of Zen

       9.    Zen and the Ink Landscape

10.	The Zen Aesthetics of Japanese Architecture
11.
12.	The No Theater
13.
PART III: The Rise of Popular Zen Culture: 1573 to the Present

14.	Bourgeois Society and Later Zen
15.
16.	The Tea Ceremony
17.
18.	Zen Ceramic Art
19.
20.	Zen and Haiku
21.
22.	Private Zen: Flowers and Food
23.
24.	The Lessons of Zen Culture
25.
REFERENCES

BIBLIOGRAPHY

GLOSSARY




