
The problem was, Lou had been right about one thing. It'd been years
since I'd been to Guatemala, and I wasn't sure I knew beans about how
things operated down there these days. I was high on motivation and
only so-so in the area of modus operandi. I needed Steve's help in
plying the tricky waters of that part of the planet. He was busy, but
this was definitely "us against the world" time, so maybe he could
drive over to Guatemala City and help.

I picked up the phone again and punched in the number of his hotel in
Belize City, which seemed to be embedded permanently in my brain. That
wonderful accent at the desk mon, and then they were ringing his room.
I had no reason on earth to assume he would be there, but . . .

The click, the voice, it was him.

"Sorry to call so late, love. You said you missed me, so I've decided
to find out if it's true. Your coming attraction is about to arrive."

I guess I was trying to keep it flip. After our talk that morning, I
wasn't entirely sure where we stood anymore.

"Who . . . Morgy, is that you? God it's two . . . Are you okay?" Then
he started coming around, processing what I said. "You're coming . . .
Honey, that's great."

As I noted before, he always knew how to give a good reading, sound
sincere, no matter what the occasion.

"Actually, I've just made a plane reservation, and I'm going to be in
Guatemala City tomorrow, just after noon." I hesitated then thought,
why beat around the bush? "Care to meet me there?"

"That's terrific," he declared coming fully awake. "But why don't you
just come to Belize City? Can't you get flight? It's actually not
nearly as wild here as the travel books--"

"Well, I've . . . Look, I'd rather not talk about this on the phone.
But do you think you could get free and drive over I really could use
your help. I've got a situation."

"Well . . ." He paused. "I could be there by late tomorrow assuming my
rented Jeep still operates after last week and the roads haven't
totally disintegrated. Where're you going to be staying?"

"I don't know. Got any suggestions? I want to keep out of the
limelight."

"Then try the Camino Real. It's like a Holiday Inn with plastic palm
trees. Definitely low maintenance and low profile. Hang on, I'll get
you the number."

Which he did, though I could hear him stumbling around the room in the
dark. Then he continued.

"But listen, here's the bad news. I've got to be back here day after
tomorrow. I just got a special permit to do some night shooting in the
jaguar preserve down by Victoria Peak--you remember the rain forest I
told you about?--but it's only good for one night, and I hear rumors
there's an off-season hurricane forming in the Caribbean, which means
I've got to stick to schedule. After that, though, I'm free again."

"We'll work it out." I was thrilled he would just drop everything and
come. Maybe we were over the rough spot about the baby.

He didn't bring that up and I didn't either. Instead we killed a few
minutes, and then I let him go back to sleep. I wanted to say I love
you, but I didn't want to push my luck.

After that I called the hotel he'd recommended. The exchange was more
Spanish than English, but they had a room. Apparently lots of rooms.

Next I rang Paula Marks, even though it was terribly late. She must
have had the phones off, but I left a message telling her to be
careful, with a postscript that I'd explain everything later. Just
stick close to home.

Finally I called David's voice mail up at Applecore. I told him I had a
personal crisis and was going to Guatemala City. I'd try to be back by
the end of the week, hell or high water, but no guarantees. And if he
touched so much as a frame of my work print while I was gone, I'd
personally strangle him.

I don't remember much of what happened next. I basically went on
autopilot. It's as though I dropped into a trance, totally focused. I
packed my passport, a good business suit, the tailored blue one, and
also a set of mix-and-match separates, easy to roll and cram in.
Finally a couple of pairs of good (clean) jeans, a few toiletries, and
then, thinking ahead, I also threw in my yellow plastic flashlight. I
almost always over pack, but not this time.

Oh, and one other thing. For airplane reading I grabbed a Lonely Planet
guide to Central America that Steve had left behind--I guess he figured
he was at the stage of life to start writing them, not reading
them--that turned out to be very helpful, particularly the map of
Guatemala City and the northern Peten rain forest. I then collapsed
and--images of Sarah's emaciated face haunting my consciousness--caught
a couple of hours' sleep.

The next thing I knew, it was 9:20 A.M. and I was settling into window
seat 29F on American Airlines Flight 377--next to a two-hundred-pound
executive busy ripping articles out of the business section of _El
Diario_--headed for Guatemala City.

