A Comparative Study of Users' Microblogging Behavior on Sina Weibo and Twitter
Summary
Both Twitter and Weibo have been analyzed in the past, but a comprehensive comparison between the two has been lacking so far. To fill this gap the authors present three contributions in their paper: An extension of an already existing user modeling framework with sentiment analysis and semantic enrichment of Chinese posts; a comparative analysis of Twitter and Weibo posts; and a discussion on correlations between the analysis and cultural stereotypes. 
For comparing Weibo and Twitter posts five aspects of these posts are defined: how the platform is accessed, the writing style, the topical content, displayed sentiments and finally temporal characteristics. For each of these five aspects two research questions are formulated, where the first one is more exploratory and the second one more analytical, e.g. ‘How does hashtag use differ for Twitter and Weibo’ versus ‘How is hashtag use influenced by the access behavior’. The analysis of each of the five aspects is presented based on 24 million tweets and 22 million Weibo posts.
Several of the findings following from the analysis are the following. First, Weibo users use less hashtags in general, but their posts have a higher chance to contain entities, making entity-based user models more successful. Secondly Weibo users are more active on weekends, while Twitter users are more active on weekdays. Finally on Weibo users avoid discussions about organizations much more than users from Twitter. In the discussion the authors try to relate these findings to stereotypes of the respective users, correlating them to a higher power distance and individualism for American users and more long-term orientation for Chinese users.
Review
The paper is clearly presented and every aspect is explained in enough detail. A clear topic definition and relevance for the research is presented in the introduction, but missing is a short statement in the abstract what makes this topic interesting to pursue. Three contributions are listed explicitly: an extended framework, intensive analysis and relating the findings to cultural stereotypes. The structure of the paper especially reflects the second contribution well; research questions for the analysis are presented and the followed methodology is outlined before the analysis is presented and a short discussion is held about the results.
For the first contribution it’s shortly stated how the authors implemented this, giving a clear impression this contribution isn’t regarded as very important. The second contribution, analysis,  is more at the core of this paper. Data is presented that supports the ten findings, although the findings appear obvious at most times, as with F2 hinting that more clients were used for Twitter because there are simply more different clients available. The third contribution seems to be added at the last time, because it does not seem to hold much connection to earlier parts of the paper. It’s suddenly added at the end of the abstract and the Discussions section stays vague, seemingly cherry-picking findings to match cultural notions that weren’t explicitly defined prior to the research. While relating user behavior to cultural differences is a very interesting subject, the current discussion is too short to do this topic justice.
To conclude, the authors give a solid analysis of several differences between Twitter and Weibo, but try to present too many contributions in one paper, resulting in too little detail for two of the three contributions.
