Human as Real-Time Sensors of Social and Physical Events: A Case Study of Twitter and Sports Games
Summary
This paper discusses the possibility of using humans as sensors for events happening in the world, by detecting events from their tweets, and  specifically events happening within NFL sports games. In previous work major events such as earthquakes were already detected, or event detection wasn’t used in a real-time fashion. To select only relevant tweets for the NFL games, extraction by the top 10 selected NFL keywords was used, giving 1 million tweets that were analysed in real time for the NFL Superbowl.
Detecting events from the tweets was done in two steps, first looking at increased post rates following an event, then analysing the tweets during that increased post rate. Four sliding windows of different size were used to determine events, giving a trade-off between accuracy and detection speed where the smallest window would be less accurate but faster. The second part analysed the tweets lexicographically on game words, to identify the exact event happening. This method provided a 90% accuracy for major game events, and 64% accuracy for minor game events.
Three types of delay were presented for this real-time system: the human delay, twitter delay and analysis delay, The human delay is on average 17 seconds, which is the time humans need to start tweeting something they see. The twitter delay can be 1 or 30 seconds, depending on keywords. The analysis delay is 15 seconds on average, the time it takes to process the tweets. This gives the ability to recognise events in less than 40 seconds.
Review
The paper is written and presented in a clear way, and the authors make a number of claims. First that the service can recognize NFL game events within 40 seconds with up to 90% accuracy. Second that this demonstrates for the first time the feasibility of using Twitter for real-time social and physical event detection. Third, it’s claimed this work answers how good Twitter is at real-time sensing for events such as sport games.
The claims are mostly supported by the information presented in the paper, but they appear to be better presented in the introduction than is in fact supported. For the first claim the presented service indeed detects NFL events within, on average, 40 seconds, and in the best case it achieves a 90% accuracy. This best case is the claim that is presented with the words ‘up to’, disregarding that this only counts for the most significant events and that other events get detected far less often. The second claim also hinges on assumptions that are only apparent after the conclusion. Only in the conclusion it’s presented that this research is only relevant for pre-selected keywords to indicate events, making the general feasibility of using twitter for event detection not a question that’s answered in this paper. The third claim is supported by the presented service, although they only show that twitter can be used to detect these specific events, making it more a discussion on how good the system is, rather than how good twitter is.
Finally at multiple places in this paper limitations on using the twitter api are complained about, leading to statements like “if it weren’t for how twitter worked, we could have had better results!” This more bemoans how twitter works rather than presents the research and findings.
While the topic is interesting and the paper shows a way to use tweets for real-time event detection, the above points make for a weakly presented research with claims that are not fully supported. 
