Chapter 15



_Tuesday, April 7

8:13 P.M._



What a day! When Ally finally settled onto her couch, after giving
Knickers a long walk, she was exhausted. She leaned back and kicked off
her shoes. There had been a few moments of tightness in her chest--maybe
it was psychological, anxiety-induced--but that was gone now. She
thought about calling New Jersey to ask how Nina was doing, but she
doubted they would tell her anything.

She'd spent the latter part of the afternoon getting yet another heart
exam. After driving to northern New Jersey and back, she'd had a formal
(and exhausting) stress test for her heart at the New York University
Faculty Practice. God, she was sick of examining rooms and those blue
paper shifts you put on backwards, as though it was okay for doctors
and nurses to see your bare ass. Then she put on shorts and sneakers
and an Israeli physician stuck wired suction cups all over her chest
and put her on a treadmill for seventeen minutes, boosting her pulse to
over 150, which was as high as he dared to go. Then he called Van de
Vliet, faxed him the charts, and they reviewed the squiggly lines for
another ten minutes.  Finally she had a high-speed CT scan, whose
results were then sent directly to Karl Van de Vliet's lab computer.

The bottom line was, the damaged valve in her aortic ventricle was
deteriorating even more rapidly than her regular physician, Dr.
Ekelman, had thought, but her heart was still strong enough for the
procedure.

She wondered if she had gone this far because she was letting hope
outweigh a sober evaluation of the risks. Was this the sign of complete
desperation? Whatever she decided, tomorrow was the day, D day,
decision day.

She thought again about her mom, who had been bubbling with hope when
she looked in on her. Nina hadn't even been formally checked in, but
already she seemed transformed. It was enough for her just to entertain
the possibility that her mind could be renewed. That in itself was
sufficient to convince Ally to sign the consent agreement for Van de
Vliet to go forward with her procedure. He even offered to provide a
car service to take Maria home to the Bronx after Nina was settled and
resting.

In her own case, the special injections for her heart, she was far less
sure what she thought. The part that bothered her most was having to
give herself entirely over to a person she scarcely knew. It was the
kind of ultimate surrender that she abhorred.

While Knickers rummaged behind the couch for the remnants of her
rawhide chew toy, Ally momentarily considered calling Grant. She
couldn't think of a reason why except that he was the only coherent
immediate family she had left and this felt like a moment for pulling
together. God, she missed Steve. Sometimes she felt so alone.

Then she considered calling Stone Aimes, but she decided that would
seem pushy. The truth was, she'd enjoyed talking to him and she'd been
surprised at how comfortable she'd felt. Looking back over the elapsed
years, she couldn't remember exactly why they split up. There must have
been a good reason, but now she could only recall the good times. A
picnic in Central Park, or the time they took the Staten Island ferry
at night just to see the inspiring downtown skyline.

With those jumbled thoughts cluttering her mind, she finally got around
to remembering she hadn't checked her phone machine. She got up off the
couch and went into the bedroom.

There were three calls and at first she thought she was too exhausted
to check them.

But no, that was irresponsible. She was running a business...

"Hi, Ally, it's me." The voice was Jennifer's. "No emergency, but call
when you get in and let me know how it went, okay?"

Not tonight. There was too much to explain and she was too tired. She
went to the second message.

"Hi, it's me again. I need you to look over the Jameson design, that
Italian-marble bath. They're having trouble getting the ocher. Some
kind of strike at the quarry. What can they substitute? But remember,
it's got to be absurdly overpriced or they'll assume it's crap. If I
don't hear back from you, I'll fax you some stuff in the morning."

Okay, she thought, these rich clients love to show off. I'll get them
what they should have ordered in the first place, knowing them. Stone
from the quarry near Agra, where they got the marble for the Taj Mahal.
That ought to be ostentatious enough. It'll take an extra couple of
months, but that will impress them even more.

