
"What's going on?" he asked as he wandered in. He was carrying a shot
glass of tequila and a white plate with the cheese omelette. The aroma
was seductive.

"I want to check out something. I have to be honest and confess I've
been holding out on you a little. When I saw Winston Bartlett that
night on the pier, something he said--"

"Ally, I need to do some confessing too. The time never seemed quite
right. I need to tell you something about him."

"Well, don't tell me now. I don't think I can handle anything else to
worry about tonight. Please save it."

She was logging on to AOL. Then she went to the search engine Google,
which she had found to be the best.

"I want to check out that name you came up with. It rang a bell."

She typed in Methuselah, supposedly the guy who lived for nearly a
thousand years.

There were pages and pages of references relating to that word. It
started with a five-thousand-year-old pine tree, then an article from
Modern Maturity on how to extend life, then Caltech research on a
longevity gene, then a rock band in Texas (undoubtedly very retro), a
short story by Isaac Bashevis Singer, and so it went.

"What, exactly, are you looking for?" he asked, holding out a folk.
"Here. Want a bite?"

She reached and tore off a fluffy corner. He did eggs perfectly.

"Thanks," she said, chewing. Now she was moving to the third page. "I
think I'm looking for an organization. And Methuselah was in the name.
At least . . . that's what I seem to remember. I'm definitely
repressing a lot."

"Well, what about that one?" he asked, pointing.

The line read, the Methuselah Society.

"That's it," she declared. "Now I remember. That's the name he used. I
swear. So it's real. I'm not crazy."

"What are you talking about?"

"It's him. That's what he said he was going to do."

She clicked on the name.

The Web page came up and it was strictly in black and white, with small
print. And there it was again, THE METHUSELAH SOCIETY. There was no
information beyond a request for a secure e-mail address.

"Looks like they want to check you out," Stone said.

"To make sure you're not connected to politics or law enforcement."

"Then why not give it a shot," Stone said. "You're on AOL. You'd have
to be a civilian."

She typed in her address and entered it. Immediately a little yellow
padlock appeared in the lower right-hand corner, indicating their
communication was secure. Then a notice materialized, a small square
flickering to life. It contained her phone number and then her name.
Next a complete financial record began to scroll down. It had been
elicited from banks, mortgage companies, credit services. There was
Value of Real Estate owned, Mortgages Outstanding, Bank Accounts,
Outstanding Obligations, Estimated Net Worth. It had all appeared in a
time span of seconds.

"Wow," Stone said. "There are no secrets left from these guys, whoever
they are. They are wired."

Then a message appeared: The minimum net worth required to be a member
is 500 Million Dollars. The fee for membership is 100 Million Dollars.
A 10-Million-Dollar retainer is required while your application is
being processed. Please be prepared to designate the ages you and your
companion wish to remain.

"My God," she said, "that's him. He's done it. Winston Bartlett is
alive and well, and selling immortality, real or not."

Then another message came up: Welcome, Alexa. Please be advised you are
already a member. But you have not yet selected a companion.



                                  *         *        *









                                Afterword



How much of the foregoing is true or even plausible?

In late 2002, medical researchers in Dusseldorf announced they had
successfully treated heart-attack victims using stem cells harvested
from the patients' own bone marrow. The stem cells were delivered to
damaged heart muscle via angioplasty catheters, a minimally invasive
procedure. Subsequent monitoring indicated that the stem cells had
reduced the damage to heart-muscle tissue and had improved their heart
function when compared to similar patients in a control group who had
declined the procedure.

It's already happening.

The miraculous stem cell cures in this story are essentially an
extrapolation of research well underway that has been the subject of
magazine covers and is possibly the most promising and, yes,
problematic field of medical research. The clocks at the Dorian
Institute ran faster than ordinary timepieces, and research areas and
cures that currently are only speculation were made real there. But
that's why it's called fiction. As with the example cited above, many
stem cell miracles conjured here may be just over the horizon.

As for Kristen and the Methuselah Society, they are a fictional
embodiment of misgivings given voice by many, including no less an
authority than Professor Leonard Hayflick, whose Hayflick limit,
defining the process of how cells grow old could be said to be the
underpinning of modern stem cell research. He is now a leading
bioethicist who is sufficiently convinced of our potential to use stem
cells to arrest the actual aging process that he has worried about its
ramifications in print. He makes no claim that such a thing is
imminent, but he doesn't dismiss its possibility either. He has far-
reaching societal concerns about this, and he also raises biological
issues such as, if you've treated your brain malady by using stem cells
to grow new neural tissue, have you altered your mind? Are you still
you?

           It's called Regenerative Medicine. Watch for it.

