As she considered going to the third message, she had a feeling of
misgiving, though in truth there were several people she wouldn't mind
hearing from.

Or maybe the Dorian Institute had called about Nina. Maybe she'd
freaked. This whole thing was happening way too fast. In any case, she
didn't really want to talk to anybody right now. What she really wanted
to do was sit and think, maybe run the whole thing by Stone and get his
take{~HORIZONTAL ELLIPSIS~}.

She decided to check out the third message.

"Hi, it's your intrepid reporter, just checking in to see how it went
today. It's just after eight, and I'm at home. I may not be able to
afford this place much longer, given all the excitement I've had today,
so call me while I still have an apartment and a phone."

She felt a ripple of excitement and the feeling pleased her. Maybe she
did have someone stable and rational in her corner, someone who
understood the risks and possible rewards of going forward with the
procedure.

She'd put his number in her Palm, which was in her bag, and she went
back to the living room, poured herself a glass of wine, and then
retrieved it.

She heard him pick up on the second ring.

"Hi, it's Ally. Thanks for checking on me. I'm really not in the
greatest shape at the moment."

"Oh yeah? So how'd it go?"

"Well, I met Dr. Miracle. . . ." She paused. "I don't know quite how to
handle you, Stone. Are we having some kind of reunion? The affair
redux. Are we friends all over again? Two days ago, all we had were
memories. Then I start getting phone calls from you. I still don't know
what I'm supposed to think."

"I'll tell you what I think. I think we're playing this by ear. I don't
know what you've been doing for the years that I haven't seen you. I
don't know what you know about me. So this is kind of like a blind date
with a lot of baggage."

"I agree," she said, then hesitated. Her resolve was melting. "I might
as well say this. Is it too late to come down and talk? I thought I was
tough enough to handle this on my own, but I definitely could use
psychological support."

"Give me the address. I could use a little support myself. I got
tlhreatened today, I think, by somebody who would like to crush me like
a bug. And easily could. I'll spare you the ironies, but you and I may
have more in common than you think. My interest in the Gerex
Corporation has just gotten extremely personal."

         After she hung up, she felt energized and she decided to give
Jennifer a call after all. In truth, she wanted to tell her about Stone
and to get her take on whether seeing him was a good idea. Aren't these
second-time-around things always doomed?

"Hi, Jen. I'm home and I'm making all kinds of fateful decisions."

"So what happened? Are you going to be a guinea pig for that clinic?"

"Is that what you think it amounts to?" She couldn't tell how serious
Jennifer intended to be. "I'm still debating it Mom loved the place."

"Well, good. Good for her. But you're still not sure about you?"

"I'm leaning .  . ." She paused. "Jen, somebody I used to see in
college is on his way down here right now. He's a medical reporter, but
the truth is, I don't know why I asked him."

"I guess if I were your shrink, I'd ask, 'How do you feel about that?'"

"If I knew the answer to that, I wouldn't need you to be a one-woman
support group." She bit her lip. "He's doing a book about stem cell
procedures. So in a way it's a lucky break that he appeared exactly
when he did."

"Yeah, Ally, if you ask me, it sounds like it was a lucky break in more
than one way. An old flame reappearing can be a positive sign. It's
high time something happened in your life."

You 're tighter than you know, she thought. I'm ready for this, whether
I admit it to myself or not. But is there going to be any chemistry
when we actually see each other? There used to be a lot.

The embarrassing thing was, her first thought was to wonder if he was
still terrific in bed. She remembered thinking he was very adroit back
then, but back then she didn't have much experience to compare him
with. Mainly, thinking about him now made her painfully aware she was
overdue for some closeness.

