
It was yet better to see it, and we stopped at some rocks on the coast of
Mull.  The mouth is fortified by vast fragments of stone, over which we
made our way, neither very nimbly, nor very securely.  The place,
however, well repaid our trouble.  The bottom, as far as the flood rushes
in, was encumbered with large pebbles, but as we advanced was spread over
with smooth sand.  The breadth is about forty-five feet: the roof rises
in an arch, almost regular, to a height which we could not measure; but I
think it about thirty feet.

This part of our curiosity was nearly frustrated; for though we went to
see a cave, and knew that caves are dark, we forgot to carry tapers, and
did not discover our omission till we were wakened by our wants.  Sir
Allan then sent one of the boatmen into the country, who soon returned
with one little candle.  We were thus enabled to go forward, but could
not venture far.  Having passed inward from the sea to a great depth, we
found on the right hand a narrow passage, perhaps not more than six feet
wide, obstructed by great stones, over which we climbed and came into a
second cave, in breadth twenty-five feet.  The air in this apartment was
very warm, but not oppressive, nor loaded with vapours.  Our light showed
no tokens of a feculent or corrupted atmosphere.  Here was a square
stone, called, as we are told, Fingal's Table.

If we had been provided with torches, we should have proceeded in our
search, though we had already gone as far as any former adventurer,
except some who are reported never to have returned; and, measuring our
way back, we found it more than a hundred and sixty yards, the eleventh
part of a mile.

Our measures were not critically exact, having been made with a walking
pole, such as it is convenient to carry in these rocky countries, of
which I guessed the length by standing against it.  In this there could
be no great errour, nor do I much doubt but the Highlander, whom we
employed, reported the number right.  More nicety however is better, and
no man should travel unprovided with instruments for taking heights and
distances.

There is yet another cause of errour not always easily surmounted, though
more dangerous to the veracity of itinerary narratives, than imperfect
mensuration.  An observer deeply impressed by any remarkable spectacle,
does not suppose, that the traces will soon vanish from his mind, and
having commonly no great convenience for writing, defers the description
to a time of more leisure, and better accommodation.

He who has not made the experiment, or who is not accustomed to require
rigorous accuracy from himself, will scarcely believe how much a few
hours take from certainty of knowledge, and distinctness of imagery; how
the succession of objects will be broken, how separate parts will be
confused, and how many particular features and discriminations will be
compressed and conglobated into one gross and general idea.

To this dilatory notation must be imputed the false relations of
travellers, where there is no imaginable motive to deceive.  They trusted
to memory, what cannot be trusted safely but to the eye, and told by
guess what a few hours before they had known with certainty.  Thus it was
that Wheeler and Spon described with irreconcilable contrariety things
which they surveyed together, and which both undoubtedly designed to show
as they saw them.

When we had satisfied our curiosity in the cave, so far as our penury of
light permitted us, we clambered again to our boat, and proceeded along
the coast of Mull to a headland, called Atun, remarkable for the columnar
form of the rocks, which rise in a series of pilasters, with a degree of
regularity, which Sir Allan thinks not less worthy of curiosity than the
shore of Staffa.

Not long after we came to another range of black rocks, which had the
appearance of broken pilasters, set one behind another to a great depth.
This place was chosen by Sir Allan for our dinner.  We were easily
accommodated with seats, for the stones were of all heights, and
refreshed ourselves and our boatmen, who could have no other rest till we
were at Icolmkill.

The evening was now approaching, and we were yet at a considerable
distance from the end of our expedition.  We could therefore stop no more
to make remarks in the way, but set forward with some degree of
eagerness.  The day soon failed us, and the moon presented a very solemn
and pleasing scene.  The sky was clear, so that the eye commanded a wide
circle: the sea was neither still nor turbulent: the wind neither silent
nor loud.  We were never far from one coast or another, on which, if the
weather had become violent, we could have found shelter, and therefore
contemplated at ease the region through which we glided in the
tranquillity of the night, and saw now a rock and now an island grow
gradually conspicuous and gradually obscure.  I committed the fault which
I have just been censuring, in neglecting, as we passed, to note the
series of this placid navigation.

We were very near an Island, called Nun's Island, perhaps from an ancient
convent.  Here is said to have been dug the stone that was used in the
buildings of Icolmkill.  Whether it is now inhabited we could not stay to
inquire.

At last we came to Icolmkill, but found no convenience for landing.  Our
boat could not be forced very near the dry ground, and our Highlanders
carried us over the water.

We were now treading that illustrious Island, which was once the luminary
of the Caledonian regions, whence savage clans and roving barbarians
derived the benefits of knowledge, and the blessings of religion.  To
abstract the mind from all local emotion would be impossible, if it were
endeavoured, and would be foolish, if it were possible.  Whatever
withdraws us from the power of our senses; whatever makes the past, the
distant, or the future predominate over the present, advances us in the
dignity of thinking beings.  Far from me and from my friends, be such
frigid philosophy as may conduct us indifferent and unmoved over any
ground which has been dignified by wisdom, bravery, or virtue.  That man
is little to be envied, whose patriotism would not gain force upon the
plain of Marathon, or whose piety would not grow warmer among the ruins
of Iona!
