
The walls were always too strong to be shaken by such desultory
hostilities; the windows were too narrow to be entered, and the
battlements too high to be scaled.  The only danger was at the gates,
over which the wall was built with a square cavity, not unlike a chimney,
continued to the top.  Through this hollow the defendants let fall stones
upon those who attempted to break the gate, and poured down water,
perhaps scalding water, if the attack was made with fire.  The castle of
Lochbuy was secured by double doors, of which the outer was an iron
grate.

In every castle is a well and a dungeon.  The use of the well is evident.
The dungeon is a deep subterraneous cavity, walled on the sides, and
arched on the top, into which the descent is through a narrow door, by a
ladder or a rope, so that it seems impossible to escape, when the rope or
ladder is drawn up.  The dungeon was, I suppose, in war, a prison for
such captives as were treated with severity, and, in peace, for such
delinquents as had committed crimes within the Laird's jurisdiction; for
the mansions of many Lairds were, till the late privation of their
privileges, the halls of justice to their own tenants.

As these fortifications were the productions of mere necessity, they are
built only for safety, with little regard to convenience, and with none
to elegance or pleasure.  It was sufficient for a Laird of the Hebrides,
if he had a strong house, in which he could hide his wife and children
from the next clan.  That they are not large nor splendid is no wonder.
It is not easy to find how they were raised, such as they are, by men who
had no money, in countries where the labourers and artificers could
scarcely be fed.  The buildings in different parts of the Island shew
their degrees of wealth and power.  I believe that for all the castles
which I have seen beyond the Tweed, the ruins yet remaining of some one
of those which the English built in Wales, would supply materials.

These castles afford another evidence that the fictions of romantick
chivalry had for their basis the real manners of the feudal times, when
every Lord of a seignory lived in his hold lawless and unaccountable,
with all the licentiousness and insolence of uncontested superiority and
unprincipled power.  The traveller, whoever he might be, coming to the
fortified habitation of a Chieftain, would, probably, have been
interrogated from the battlements, admitted with caution at the gate,
introduced to a petty Monarch, fierce with habitual hostility, and
vigilant with ignorant suspicion; who, according to his general temper,
or accidental humour, would have seated a stranger as his guest at the
table, or as a spy confined him in the dungeon.

Lochbuy means the Yellow Lake, which is the name given to an inlet of the
sea, upon which the castle of Mr. Maclean stands.  The reason of the
appellation we did not learn.

We were now to leave the Hebrides, where we had spent some weeks with
sufficient amusement, and where we had amplified our thoughts with new
scenes of nature, and new modes of life.  More time would have given us a
more distinct view, but it was necessary that Mr. Boswell should return
before the courts of justice were opened; and it was not proper to live
too long upon hospitality, however liberally imparted.

Of these Islands it must be confessed, that they have not many
allurements, but to the mere lover of naked nature.  The inhabitants are
thin, provisions are scarce, and desolation and penury give little
pleasure.

The people collectively considered are not few, though their numbers are
small in proportion to the space which they occupy.  Mull is said to
contain six thousand, and Sky fifteen thousand.  Of the computation
respecting Mull, I can give no account; but when I doubted the truth of
the numbers attributed to Sky, one of the Ministers exhibited such facts
as conquered my incredulity.

Of the proportion, which the product of any region bears to the people,
an estimate is commonly made according to the pecuniary price of the
necessaries of life; a principle of judgment which is never certain,
because it supposes what is far from truth, that the value of money is
always the same, and so measures an unknown quantity by an uncertain
standard.  It is competent enough when the markets of the same country,
at different times, and those times not too distant, are to be compared;
but of very little use for the purpose of making one nation acquainted
with the state of another.  Provisions, though plentiful, are sold in
places of great pecuniary opulence for nominal prices, to which, however
scarce, where gold and silver are yet scarcer, they can never be raised.

In the Western Islands there is so little internal commerce, that hardly
any thing has a known or settled rate.  The price of things brought in,
or carried out, is to be considered as that of a foreign market; and even
this there is some difficulty in discovering, because their denominations
of quantity are different from ours; and when there is ignorance on both
sides, no appeal can be made to a common measure.

This, however, is not the only impediment.  The Scots, with a vigilance
of jealousy which never goes to sleep, always suspect that an Englishman
despises them for their poverty, and to convince him that they are not
less rich than their neighbours, are sure to tell him a price higher than
the true.  When Lesley, two hundred years ago, related so punctiliously,
that a hundred hen eggs, new laid, were sold in the Islands for a peny,
he supposed that no inference could possibly follow, but that eggs were
in great abundance.  Posterity has since grown wiser; and having learned,
that nominal and real value may differ, they now tell no such stories,
lest the foreigner should happen to collect, not that eggs are many, but
that pence are few.
