SYNDROME



Chapter 1



_Sunday, April 5

6:49 A.M.

_

Alexa Hampton was awakened by a sensation in her chest. The alarm
wasn't set to go off for another eleven minutes, but she knew her sleep
was finished.

Not again! She rolled over and slapped the blue pillowcase.

That little sound from her heart and the twinges of angina, that
catchall for heart discomfort, was happening more and more now, just as
Dr. Ekelman had warned her. But she wasn't going to let it stop her
from living her life to the fullest as long as she could, and right now
that meant having her morning run.

She curled her legs around, onto the floor, reached for a nitroglycerin
tab, and slipped it under her tongue. Known as a vasodilator, the nitro
lowered the workload on her heart by expanding her veins. It should get
her through the workout ....

That was when she felt a warm presence rub against her leg.

"Hi, baby." Still sucking on the tab, she reached over and tousled
Knickers' gray-and-white hair, then pushed it back from her dog's eyes.
Her Old English sheepdog, a huge hirsute off-road vehicle, turned and
licked her hand. Knickers was ready to hit the trail.

She'd been dreaming of Steve when the chest tightness came, and maybe
the emotion that stirred up had caused the angina. She still dreamed of
him often, and it was always someplace where they had been together and
loved, and they were ever on the brink of some disaster. That
frequently caused her heart to race, waking her.

This time it was the vacation they took six years ago, in the spring.
They were sailing off Norman's Cay in the Bahamas. She was raising the
jib, the salt spray in her hair, but then she looked up and realized
they were about to ram a reef.

She felt the dreams were her unconscious telling her to beware her
current precarious condition. If, as is said, at the moment of your
passing, your entire life flashes before your eyes, then the dreams
were like that, only in slow motion. It was as though she were being
prepared for something. The dreams were a premonition. She had a pretty
good idea of what.

Ally had had rheumatic fever when she was five, which went undetected
long enough to scar a valve in her heart. The formal name was
rheumatoid aortic stenosis, a rare, almost freakish condition that had
shaped her entire life. The pediatrician at Mount Sinai had told her
parents they should think twice about allowing her to engage in any
vigorous activity. Her heart's function could be deceptively normal
during childhood but when she got older . . . Well, why stress that
organ now and hasten the inevitable day when it could no longer keep up
with the rest of her body?

She had refused to listen. She'd played volleyball in grade school,
basketball in high school, and she became a disciplined runner when she
went to Columbia to study architecture. She wanted to prove that you
could make your heart stronger if you believed hard enough and wanted
to live hard enough.

Now, though, it was all catching up. She'd had a complete checkup two
weeks ago Thursday, including a stress test and

Doppler echocardiogram, and Dr. Ekelman had laid out the situation,
gazing over her half-lens glasses and pulling at her chin. The normal
twinkle in her eyes was entirely absent.

"Alexa, your condition has begun worsening. There's a clear aortic
murmur now when your pulse goes up. How long can you go on living in
denial? You really can't keep on stressing your heart the way you have
been. You can have a normal life, but it's got to be low-key. Don't
push your luck."

"Living half a life is so depressing," she'd declared, not entirely
sure she meant it. "It's almost worse than none at all."

"Ally, I'm warning you. If you start having chest sensations that don't
respond to nitro, call me immediately. I mean that. There's a new drug,
Ranolazine, that temporarily shifts your heart over to using glucose as
a fuel instead of fatty acids and provides more energy for a given
amount of oxygen. It will make the pain back off, but I only want to
start you on that as a last resort. That's the final stop before open-
heart surgery and a prosthetic aortic valve."

Day by day, the illusion of normality was getting harder and harder to
maintain. She had been playing second violin in an amateur string
quartet called the West Village Oldies, but a month ago she'd had to
drop out. She didn't have the endurance to practice enough to keep up
with the others. Blast. It was having to give up things you love that
really hurt.

Still, she was determined to keep a positive attitude. There was your
heart, and then there was heart. You had to understand the difference.

She lay back to wait for the alarm and try to compose her mind. This
Sunday morning was actually the one day of the year she most dreaded.
The anniversary.

It had been back when Steve was still alive. They were living in the
Chelsea neighborhood of New York, in a brownstone town house they were
renting. The rent was high, but they were doing all right. Steve was a
political consultant, who had helped some fledgling candidates overcome
the odds and win important elections. In between campaigns here, he
also got work in the nominal democracies in Latin America.

She was a partner in a small firm of architects who had all been at
Columbia together and decided to team up after graduation and start a
business. There were four of them--she was the only woman--and it was a
struggle at the beginning. For the first three years they had to live
off crumbs tossed their way by the big boys, subcontracts from Skidmore
and other giants. They felt like they were a high-paid version of
Manpower, Inc., doing grunt work, designing the interiors of shopping
malls in the Midwest and banks in Saudi Arabia, while their prime
contractors got to keep all the sexy, big-budget jobs that called for
creativity, like a glass-and-steel office tower in L.A.
