CHAPTER TEN

The Zen Aesthetics of Japanese Architecture


_Architecturally [the Zen-inspired Silver Pavilion's] chief interest
lies in the compromise which it exhibits between religious and domestic
types, and a new style of living apartments (called _shoin_) which
specialists regard as the true forerunner of the Japanese dwelling.

 _George B. Sansom_, Japan: A Short Cultural History




Traditional Zen-style house

_



_Traditional interior w/ Zen art alcove

_

ASK ANY JAPANESE why the traditional Japanese house is bitterly cold in
winter and uncomfortably hot in summer, and he will unfailingly tell
you that the design is historically adapted to the climate. Inquire
about his purpose in rejecting furniture, thus to kneel daylong on a
straw floor mat, and he will explain that the mat is more comfortable.
Question his preference for sleeping on a wadded cotton floor pallet
instead of a conventional mattress and springs, and he will reply that
the floor provides surer rest. What he will not say, since he assumes a
Westerner cannot comprehend it, is that through these seeming physical
privations he finds shelter for the inner man.

The exquisite traditional Japanese house has been compared to an
outsized umbrella erected over the landscape, not dominating its
surroundings but providing a shaded space for living amid nature. The
outside resembles a tropical hut, while the inside is an interworking
of Mondrian geometries. Together they represent the culmination of a
long tradition of defining and handling interior space, using natural
materials, and integrating architecture and setting. The Japanese house
is one of those all too rare earthly creations that transcend the
merely utilitarian, that attend as closely to man's interior needs as
to his physical comfort.

The classic house evolved over two millennia through the adaptation and
blending of two dissimilar architectural traditions--the tropical nature
shrine, which was part of the Shinto religion of the early immigrants
to Japan, and the Chinese model, beginning with the palace architecture
of the T'ang dynasty and culminating in the designs used in the
monasteries of Chinese Ch'an Buddhism. The early immigrants, the Yayoi,
today are believed to have arrived from points somewhere to the South,
bringing a theology that defied the earth, the sun, and all the
processes of nature. Their shrines to these gods were like conventional
Oceanic huts. Thanks to a peculiar quirk of Shinto, which dictates that
certain of these wood-and-thatch shrines be dismantled and built anew
every two decades, it is still possible to see these lovely structures
essentially as they were two millennia ago. Spartan and elegant in
their simplicity, they were lyrically described by the nineteenth-
century Western Japanophile, Lafcadio Hearn:



_The typical shrine is a windowless oblong building of un-painted
timber with a very steep overhanging roof; the front is a gable end;
and the upper part of the perpetually closed doors is a wooden
latticework--usually a grating of bars closely set and crossing each
other at right angles. In most cases the structure is raised slightly
above the ground on wooden pillars; and the queer peaked facade, with
its visorlike apertures and the fantastic projections of beamwork above
its gable-angle, might remind the European traveler of old gothic forms
of dormer There is no artificial color. The plain wood soon turns,
under the action of rain and sun, to a natural gray varying according
to surface exposure from a silvery tone of birch bark to a somber gray
of basalt.1

_

_Although the early immigrants lived first in caves and later in roofed
pits dug into the earth, by the beginning of the Christian Era the
aristocracy was building elevated dwellings on posts, with roofs
supported not by the walls but by a central horizontal ridge pole
suspended between two large columns at either end of the structure.2

_

It was, in fact, identical to the Shinto shrine design described by
Hearn. As a home for the Shinto gods, this tropical design may well
have been adequate, since nature spirits are presumably adapted to the
rigors of a Japanese winter, but the Yayoi must have found that it
enforced an unwelcome communion with the seasons. Even so, Hearn's
description could be applied almost without alteration to the external
qualities of the traditional dwelling as it finally evolved. One still
finds the thatch roof, the use of pillars to suspend the floor above
the ground, unfinished natural wood, and the virtual absence of nails.

During the fifth and sixth centuries A.D. the early Japanese became
aware of the complex Chinese culture on the Asian mainland, and by the
beginning of the eighth century they had forsworn the primitive
tropical architecture of Shinto and begun to surround themselves with
palaces and temples modeled on the Chinese. During the Heian era, a
Chinese-inspired aristocrat dwelling developed which represented a
compromise between Japanese requirements and Chinese models. Although
influenced by T'ang Chinese palaces, it was the first indigenous
Japanese architectural style and is known as _shinden_.

The _shinden _mansion was a sprawling complex dominated by a main
building facing a pond, around which were flanked ancillary structures
connected to it by open galleries protected only by a roof. These open
galleries, being very much the fashion, were also built around the
outside of all the larger rooms and served as passageways. There were
no solid walls inside the buildings; privacy was obtained by curtains
and two-part horizontal doors hinged at the top and attached to the
ceiling. Adopting Chinese construction methods, Japanese began roofing
the buildings with dark clay tiles instead of native thatch, and walls
were frequently surfaced with clay rather than wood planks or woven
straw. Exterior woods were painted Chinese vermilion instead of being
left to age naturally.

Furnishings were meager, and rooms were not identified according to
usage; the building was one large area temporarily divided according to
the needs of the moment. Instead of chairs there were movable floor
mats of woven straw, while around the exterior of the rooms there were
heavy shutters; these could be removed in summer or replaced by light
bamboo blinds, which rolled down like window shades. Lighting was not a
prominent feature of _shinden _mansions, and in winter the aristocracy
huddled around a smoky fire in almost total darkness, the price of
seeing being to open the blinds and freeze.
