
CHAPTER SEVENTEEN

The Lessons of Zen Culture


_It is not surprising if the religious need, the believing mind, and
the philosophical speculations of the educated European are attracted
to the symbols of the East, just as once before the heart and mind of
men of antiquity were gripped by Christian ideas.

_

Carl Gustav Jung_, Archetypes of the Collective Unconscious

_



EVERY MAJOR ZEN cultural form is designed to operate on the mind in some
manipulative, non-Western fashion. If we look carefully, we find that
not one of the Zen forms has a real counterpart in Western culture. Zen
archery and swordsmanship seem almost a species of hypnotism. Zen
gardens are a bag of tricks and specifically designed to deceive one's
perception. Zen painting is a product of the nonrational counter mind;
although it requires training at least as rigorous as any that a
Western academy could supply, at the critical moment the training is
forgotten and the work becomes wholly spontaneous. No drama uses clever
devices of suggestion to push the mind into areas of understanding too
profound for words, while the open-ended Haiku is a spark igniting an
explosion of imagery and nonrational perception in the listener's mind.
The traditional Japanese house is a psychological chamber from floor to
ceiling. Zen ceramics by subtle deceptions destroy our impulses to
categorize, forcing us to experience directly materials, process, and
form. The tea ceremony is still another exercise in deliberately
altering one's state of mind, this time under the guise of a simple
social occasion. It seems almost as if the Zen arts were intended to be
an object lesson to us on the limitations of the senses in defining
reality. Just as the _koan_ taunt the logical mind, the Zen arts, by
toying with perception, remind us that there is a reality not subject
to the five senses. In Eastern philosophy, although "seeing" involves
the senses, it must ultimately transcend them.

Zen culture has been devised over the centuries to bring us in touch
with a portion of ourselves we in the West scarcely know--our
nonrational, nonverbal side. Whereas Ch'an masters of a thousand years
ago were devising mind exercises to short-circuit and defeat the
limiting characteristics of the rational side of the mind, the idea of
the counter mind has only recently found experimental validation--and
hence intellectual respectability--in the rationalist West. (As one
example of many, recent experiments at Harvard University found that
"questions demanding . . . verbal . . . processes result in the
greatest left [brain] hemispherical activation . . . [while] emotional
questions elicit the greatest right hemispheric activation."1)
Apparently not only did the Ch'an masters intuitively realize the
existence of the nonverbal half of the mind during the T'ang era (618-
907), but they, and later the Japanese, used it to create a spectrum of
art and cultural forms which exploits, strengthens, and sharpens these
same nonverbal faculties.

Zen cultural forms are the perfect physical proof of the strength of
the counter mind. Even those using language (the No and Haiku) rely
more on suggestion than on words. Indeed, the very language of Japan
was recently described by a Japanese scholar in terms that make it
sound almost like an intuitive,

counter-mind phenomenon: "English is a language intended strictly for
communication. Japanese is primarily interested in feeling out the
other person's mood, in order to work out one's own course of action
based on one's impression."2 This difference in approach to language, in
which it is seen as a virtual barrier to communicating what is really
significant (one's subjective response), appears to be a side effect of
Zen culture. As a Japanese critic recently observed,



_A corollary to the Japanese attitude toward language might be called
the "aesthetics of silence"---making a virtue of reticence and a
vulgarity of verbalization or open expression of one's inner thoughts.
This attitude can be traced to the Zen Buddhist idea that man is
capable of arriving at the highest level of contemplative being only
when he makes no attempt at verbalizations and discounts oral
expression as the height of superficiality.3

_

Finally, Zen cultural forms use the nonverbal, nonrational powers of
the mind to produce in the perceiver a complete sense of identification
with the object. If a Zen art work is truly successful, the perceiver
has no sense of "I" and "it." If reflection or analysis is required,
the work is of no more use than a joke whose punch line needs
explanation. One's mind must immediately experience something beyond
the work. Even as the eye cannot see itself without a mirror, so it is
with the mind. The inducing of introspection turns out to be a
deliberate function of Zen art--the forcing of the mind past the surface
form of an art work and into a direct experience of a greater truth.

The Zen arts are, we realize at last, completely internalized. They
depend as much on the perception of the viewer or participants as they
do on any of their own inherent qualities. For this reason they can be
sparing and restrained. (They also happen to be perfectly suited to a
land that, over the centuries, has been as physically impoverished as
Japan.) By using small- scale, suggestive arts that depend to a large
extent on the special perception of the audience for their impact, Zen
artists were able to provide immense satisfaction with only a minor
investment of resources. It is rather like the relation of radio to
television drama. Given an audience with a good imagination, a radio
dramatist or a Zen artist can achieve the intended effect through
suggestion. This is what Sir George Sansom had in mind when he remarked
upon the

