Chapter Fourteen


Before I could ask him what the hell he was talking about, the medics
were ringing the doorbell. They strode in with a gurney, also rolling a
portable plasma IV, young guys who looked like they'd be more at home
at a Garden hockey game, followed immediately by two uniformed
policemen, actually policewomen, one short and heavy, with reddish
hair, the other a wiry young Hispanic. (I found out that ambulances
called out for stabbing or gunshot wounds automatically get a cop
escort.) In less than three minutes, Lou was in the blue-and-white
ambulance and on his way to St. Vincent's emergency room.

I rode in the backseat of the squad car as we followed them and tried
to explain what little I knew of what had happened. It turned out to be
an education in the mindless sticking points of the law.

Long story short: The fact that I hadn't reported the burglary of my
apartment that very same day immediately cast doubt on my seriousness
as a truth-seeking citizen; I had no proof the unreported burglary of
my apartment (if, indeed, such had actually occurred) was by some
Guatemalan military attache named Jose Alvino Ramos; since Lou had
never seen Colonel Ramos before tonight, he couldn't possibly identify
him as that burglar either; accusing diplomats of a crime without
ironclad proof was frowned on downtown; and when I stupidly repeated
what Lou had said about Sarah's last words (well, he was going to tell
them sooner or later, it would just come bubbling out at some point),
the whole case that she was kidnapped went into revision mode.

By the time we got to the hospital, I was getting questions that seemed
to imply that maybe it was all a domestic affair--like most of their
calls: some spaced-out chick who'd run away once and got brought back
and then, still unstable and crazy, decided to knife her own dad and
disappear again. Now he was understandably covering for her. Happened
more than you'd think.

I kept stressing that Lou was former FBI and not the sort to invent
such a whopper, but this was listened to in skeptical silence. If it
was a kidnapping, they then wondered aloud what was the motive and
where were the demands of the perpetrators? I was ready to start
yelling at them by the time we parked in the Seventh Avenue driveway of
the emergency room at St. Vincent's.

They next made me cool my heels in the waiting room while they went
back to interrogate Lou. They were with him for almost an hour, then
came back to where I was and asked me to read and sign the report
they'd written.

A troubled girl, who had emerged from a coma and apparently was
suffering bouts of non-rationality, had disappeared and her father had
been stabbed but not seriously. He was the only witness to the incident
and claimed she'd been kidnapped. However, the girl had run away once
previously, and there was no physical evidence she'd been taken against
her will; in fact, her father admitted she had declared just the
opposite. The whole incident would be investigated further after he
came downtown and made a complete statement.

"I'm not going to sign this." I handed it back, fuming.

"Is there anything here that's not factually correct?" The

Hispanic cop was looking me straight in the eye, her expression cold as
Alaska.

The question made me seethe. Sarah was probably already on her way out
of the country, and here I was trying to reason with two women who
practically thought she was the criminal. But I knew a lost cause when
I saw one.

"Forget about it. I want to see Lou."

An intern was coming out and I snagged him, announced I was next of kin
to a patient, and demanded to be taken through the official door and
into the back. At that moment, the stout cop's radio crackled. They
were being summoned to a Christopher Street gay bar where somebody had
just been knifed in a back room. She looked at me, as though to say,
"This sounds like a real crime," and then they hurried out for their
squad car. Christ!

The intern, a young black guy, led me past a row of gurneys and into a
private room at the rear of the huge space. Lou was bandaged all around
his chest and hooked up to an IV and a monitor. He looked better, but I
wasn't sure he'd be ready for what I was about to tell him.

"Hey, how're you feeling?" I asked as I walked in, trying to seem
upbeat.

"Fucking cops." He was boiling, his face actually red. "Where do they
get them these days? McDonald's rejects?"

"Easy, don't get your blood pressure up." I reached over and touched
his brow. It felt like he had a mild temperature. "Let's all just calm
down and try to think rationally."

"Yeah, I'm thinking rationally. You saw that fax I got from Williams."

"You think that was Alex Goddard seated next to her, right?"

"Who else? When she was in her moonbeam phase, she must have heard
about him and gone up there and ended up in his clutches. But why did
she let him take her down to--?"

"He told me he has a clinic in Central America. He called it 'a place
of miracles.' And then Colonel Ramos shows up, part of the Guatemalan
diplomatic corps. Put two and two together. That's got to be where
they're taking her."

"Who knows, but I'm going to get the boys downtown to put out a
missing-persons APB nationwide. Gerry'll do it for me if I ask. Fuck
New York's Finest. They ain't gonna do crap anyway."

I listened wondering how to impress my bright idea upon him. The
chances were Ramos was taking Sarah back to Guatemala. Probably right
this minute. For some kind of unfinished business. Or just to hold her
there as an insurance policy that Children of Light would never be
mentioned in my picture.

